What is IAM?

IAM (Identity and Access Management) is an AWS service that helps you securely control access to AWS resources.
It enables you to define who can access what, and what actions they can perform on AWS services and resources.

In simple terms:

IAM = Authentication (who you are) + Authorization (what you can do)

⚙️ Key Components of IAM
Component	Description	Example
User	Represents an individual or service that interacts with AWS. Each user has their own credentials (username, password, access keys).	Example: john_admin or developer_bot
Group	A collection of IAM users. You attach policies to groups to manage permissions collectively.	Example: Developers, Admins, Testers
Role	A temporary identity with specific permissions. Used by AWS services, users, or applications to perform actions without using long-term credentials.	Example: EC2AccessRole, LambdaExecutionRole
Policy	A JSON document that defines permissions — actions allowed or denied. Policies are attached to users, groups, or roles.	Example: Allowing s3:PutObject on a specific bucket
Access Keys	Used for programmatic access to AWS (CLI, SDK). Consists of an Access Key ID and a Secret Access Key.	Example: Developers accessing AWS via code
IAM Identity Center (AWS SSO)	A service for centralized access management across multiple AWS accounts and applications.	Example: Managing user access across multiple AWS accounts
Permission Boundary	A limit or upper boundary that defines maximum permissions an IAM user or role can have.	Example: Ensures no user can escalate privileges beyond a defined limit
🔒 IAM Policy – In Detail

A policy is a set of permissions written in JSON.

Policies define what actions are allowed or denied on specific resources.

✅ Example: Allow EC2 Start/Stop
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "ec2:StartInstances",
        "ec2:StopInstances"
      ],
      "Resource": "*"
    }
  ]
}

🧠 Types of Policies:
Type	Description	Example
AWS Managed Policy	Created and maintained by AWS.	AmazonS3FullAccess
Customer Managed Policy	Created by you for custom permissions.	MyEC2StartStopPolicy
Inline Policy	Embedded directly inside a user, group, or role.	A specific policy for one IAM user
👤 IAM Role – In Detail

A role is not associated with a specific user.

Instead, it’s assumed by users, applications, or AWS services when needed.

Roles use temporary credentials (through STS - Security Token Service).

✅ Example Use Cases:
Scenario	Role Example	Purpose
EC2 Instance Accessing S3	EC2S3AccessRole	Allows EC2 instances to access S3 buckets
Lambda Function Writing to CloudWatch Logs	LambdaExecutionRole	Enables Lambda to write logs
Cross-Account Access	CrossAccountRole	Allows access between AWS accounts
Federated User Login	SAMLRole	Temporary access for external users via SSO or AD
🧩 Example Role Trust Policy (Who can assume it)
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Principal": { "Service": "ec2.amazonaws.com" },
      "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
    }
  ]
}

⚖️ Difference Between Policy and Role
Feature	IAM Policy	IAM Role
Purpose	Defines permissions (what actions are allowed or denied).	Defines who can assume it and what permissions it provides.
Attachment	Attached to users, groups, or roles.	Can have one or more policies attached.
Contains	JSON document describing actions, resources, and conditions.	Permissions + Trust policy specifying who can assume the role.
Authentication	Used by a specific identity (user/group/role).	Provides temporary credentials via STS.
Example Use Case	Allow a user to read/write S3 bucket.	Allow EC2 instance to access S3 bucket.
Lifespan	Permanent (until deleted).	Temporary (valid until session expires).
🔐 IAM Best Practices

Use least privilege principle – Grant only necessary permissions.

Use roles instead of access keys for applications running on AWS.

Enable MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication) for users.

Rotate access keys regularly.

Use IAM Access Analyzer to review unused permissions.

Avoid root account for daily operations.

Organize users in groups and manage permissions through groups.
